DOC_CODE: DHA/HRS/HPSD/HP-20
TITLE: Telehealth Policy
AUTHORITY: Dubai Health Authority
TIER: official
VERSION: 1

=== DOCUMENT TEXT ===

[PAGE 1]
Applicability: All DHA Licensed Health Professionals and Health Facilities  providing Telehealth Services

To set out the regulatory requirements for licensure of Telehealth services.

To support Healthcare Innovation and Health Technology development in the field of medicine.

Telehealth services provided within the jurisdiction  of DHA.

[PAGE 1]
Health Facility: Place permitted to provide health examinations for patients and help for diagnosis, treatment , nursing or admission for cure and recovery or any other related medical procedures relating to treatment or rehabilitation post treatment.

License: Authorisation granted by DHA to the health facility  to provide healthcare services within the Emirate of Dubai under the jurisdiction of DHA.

Telehealth: Involves the use of telecommunications and virtual technology to deliver healthcare services remotely, outside of the traditional healthcare facility setting,  and without a physical presence and examination of the patient. It is used to exchange patient's m edical information from one site to another via the available electronic communications platforms such as two-way video, email, smart phones, wireless tools and other forms of telecommunication technology to assess and evaluate the patient's

Issue Nu:

1

[PAGE 2]
health status for treatment purposes. Telehealth facilitates  the delivery of health and health-related services including patient assessment, diagnosis, treatment, therapy, referral, provider and patient education and self-care, exchange of health information services via telecommunications and digital communication technologies.  Telehealth services is divided into six key areas:

Teleconsultation;

Telediagnosis;

Telemonitoring (remote patient monitoring);

mHealth (Mobile Health);

Telerobotics and robot-assisted services; and

Telepharmacy.

DHA

:    Dubai Health Authority

ICT

:     Information Communication and Technology

MoHaP :

Ministry of Health and Prevention

NESA :

TDRA :

National Electronic Security Authority

Telecommunications and Digital  Government Regulatory Authority

VOIP

:      Voice Over Internet Protocol

Issue Nu:

1

16/08/2021

[PAGE 3]
All DHA licensed Health Professionals and health facilities  providing delivering expertise and care at distance/tele-health  services shall:

Comply with the Cabinet Resolution No. (40) of 2019 on the Executive Regulation of Federal Decree-Law No. (4) of 2016 on Medical Liability Regulations and Conditions for Providing Telehealth Services.

The service provider must comply with the controls regarding the exchange of information and reporting. Service providers must:

Obtain the patient's consent before transferring  their information to another entity for the provision of telehealth services.

Transfer information shall be within the limits of need required by the patient health condition.

Adopt accurate procedures on how to transfer, save, store, protect, and maintain the confidentiality of patient's data.

Ensure all telehealth services and telehealth platforms are licensed by DHA.

Telehealth Services shall be licensed under one for the following areas:

Call Centre.

Telebooth.

Add-on services.

Comply with DHA Standards for Telehealth Services.

Comply with DHA Performance Reporting Requirements for Telehealth Services.

Comply with Dubai Health Insurance Corporation requirements for telehealth approval processes, e-claims, reimbursement and documentation.

Issue Nu:

1

Issue Date:

16/08/2021

[PAGE 4]
Ensure telehealth is made available for business continuity.

Comply with all Articles  detailed within the Federal Law No. (2) of 2019 concerning the Use of th e Information and Communication Technology in the Area of Health ('ICT Health Law') and the Ministerial  Decision no. (51) of 2021 concerning the health data and information which may be stored or transferred outside the country .

It is not permitted to store, develop, or transfer data and health information outside the country that is related to health services provided within the country, except in cases mentioned in Article  no. (2) of the Ministerial  Decision no. (51) of 2021.

Comply with National Electronic Security Authority Standards and Guidelines for Cyber Security, which include:

Management Control Family.

Technical Control Family.

Comply with Telecommunications and Digital  Government Regulatory Authority for Voice Over Internet Protocol (VOIP) channel requirements related to Telehealth.

Comply with the requirements for Dubai Electronic Security Center.

Comply with the requirements of the Ministry of Health and Prevention for the use of pharmaceuticals, medical devices and medical advertisement.

Comply with Health Informatics and Smart Health Department and Health Regulations Sector policies for Information Governance.

Issue Nu:

1

16/08/2021

[PAGE 5]
Cabinet resolution  No. (40) of 2019,  Concerning  the Executive  Regulation  of Federal  Decree-Law  No. (4) of 2016 on Medical Liability  and Addenum Regulations  and Conditions  for Providing  Telehealth Services.

Dubai Health Authority  (2018). DHA Law No. 6 of 2018.

Dubai Health Authority  (2021). Data Quality Policy.

Federal  Law No. (7) Of 1975, Concerning  Practice of Human Medicine  Profession.

Federal  Law No. (3) Of 1987, The Penal Code.

Federal  Law No. (1) Of 2006 and its corresponding  Dubai Law No. (2) Of 2002 relating to Electronic Transactions and Commerce.

Federal  Decree-Law  No. (5) Of 2012, Regarding  Combating Cybercrimes.

Federal  Law No. (6) Of 2018, Concerning  the Establishment  of Dubai Health Authority.

Federal  Law No. (2) Of 2019, Concerning  the use of ICT in health fields.

Ministerial Decision  no. (51) of 2021 concerning  the health data and information which may be stored or transferred  outside the country (Addendum  to ICT Law).

National Electronic  Security Authority  (2014).  Security  standards and guidance.

Pagliari et al (2005). What is eHealth  (4): a scoping exercise  to map the field. J Med Internet  Res; 2005;7:e9.

Telecommunications  and Digital Government  Regulatory  Authority (2017). Consumer  Protection Regulations.

UAE Constitution  (1971) and its amendments  to 2004.

Issue Nu:

1
