DOC_CODE: MOHAP/ODSC/2018
TITLE: One Day Surgery Center Regulation
AUTHORITY: Ministry of Health and Prevention
TIER: official
VERSION: 2

=== DOCUMENT TEXT ===

[PAGE 2-3]
Linen Services                                                                        28

30

.

This regulation applies to every healthcare facility subject to licensure under the Ministry Of Health establishment law.

The Ministry Of Health reserves the right to amend this regulation without prior notice. The latest version of the regulation shall be published on the Ministry Of Health website. www.moh.gov.ae

The Ministry Of Health is the sole responsible authority for licensing, regulating and monitoring healthcare facilities in the Northern Emirates. We are aiming to achieve the highest level of patient safety and quality of care through the development and enforcement of up to date health regulations.

.

[PAGE 4]
The regulation governs the basic requirements for all healthcare facilities operating in the Northern Emirates.

The  regulation  will  be  applied  to  all  health  facilities;  existing,  in renovation,  and  in  construction.  They  are  also  applied  when  a  new facility, service or procedure is to be introduced.

Regulation, standards and requirements of the other concerned Federal and  Local  Authorities  of  the  UAE  should  be  strictly  followed  in conjunction with present MOHAP regulations.

Establishing  a  new  facility,  renovating  of  existing  one  or  adding  a  new program  or  procedure  requires  the  submission  of  an  application  to  the Licensing  Department.  The  application  procedure  is  described  on  the MOHAP website.  www.moh.gov.ae.

Feasibility studies, needs analysis, potential future expansion and researches results are desirable but not obligatory.

Operating a new Day Surgery Center requires the submission and approval of the defined application form by the Ministry Of Health and prevention.

If the center is located in a multistory building, the center's main entrance should  be located at ground level, protected from all-weather elements, and easily accessible   to the public and physically disabled. A specially designated ambulance parking space adjacent to the entrance should be made available. Parking area should be specious enough to accommodate patients, staff and public needs. Villas should not be converted to day surgery center.

All centers having patient facilities located on other than the ground floor should have electrical elevators. The elevator shall accommodate a patient stretcher with all attachments, trolleys and attendant staff that are needed for worst case safe patient movement. The elevator/

[PAGE 4-7]
.

transportation system shall be able to operate during  a power failure event.

Adequate power back up of essential services are to be insured for critical areas and medical equipment.

The minimum ceiling height shall be 2.70 meters. The minimum door opening width for patient use shall be 90 centimeters and for patients confined to wheelchairs, the minimum width of door openings shall be 1.10 meters. Public corridors shall have a minimum width of 1.50 meters

Wired glass; or plastic, break-resistant material that creates no dangerous cutting edges when broken shall be used in certain areas such as glass doors and sidelights.

The Center shall be designated by a permanent and distinctive name which must not be changed without prior notification and subsequent confirmation from MOHAP. The name of the center shall not tend in any way to mislead the public as to the type   or extent of care provided by the facility.

The institute must insure that all clinical and medical equipment are installed and operated according to the manufacturer specifications. The institute must maintain effective Preventive Maintenance as recommended by the manufacturers. A safety log book in Arabic & English languages should be annexed.

Facilities handling ionizing radiation for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes and potentially bio-hazard material must comply with the Federal Authority Nuclear Regulation (FANR), the National Radiation Protection Center  (NRPC)  and the existing Federal and Local Laws. The facility should also provide safe storage and disposal of hazardous materials and biomedical waste.

Special attention should be given to implement a comprehensive and up to date infection control standards.

.

Special attention should be given to the control of environmental elements, Such as; quality of air, temperature and humidity, lighting (natural and artificial) and noise and vibration levels.

Security and safety of patients, visitors and staff should be insured at all time and stages according to the existent rules and regulations of the concerned Federal and Local Authorities in conjunction with present MOHAP regulations.

Privacy  and  confidentiality  of  patients,  visitors  and  staff  should  be respected and granted according to the UAE cultural requirements.

The center must maintain health records and reports in a manner to ensure accuracy and easy retrieval. Health records shall be maintained in the custody of the health facility and shall be available to a patient or his/her designated representative through the attending healthcare professional at reasonable times and upon reasonable notice .The center shall ensure that each patient is allocated a specific unique   identifier, and if multiple records for the same patient exist they are cross-referenced.

The facility should:

Clearly displays the hours of operation as well as the type of services available.

Visibly posts the facility license on the premises.

Maintains Charter of Patients' rights and responsibilities noticeably posted on the premises at least in two languages (Arabic and English).

Maintains adequate lighting and utilities, including temperature controls, water taps, sinks and drains, electrical outlets and communication system.

Clearly display hazardous signs aimed to restrict access for the safety of patients, visitors and staff.

Makes the facility accessible for handicapped and disabled

.

individuals.

[PAGE 7-8]
Designates secured areas for the collection of medical waste, general storage facilities for supplies and equipment and storing area for hazardous materials.

Installs fire alarm system and made available suitable firefighting equipment.

Clearly displays signage and directions for different services and departments in two languages (Arabic and English).

Use wall finishes which is washable, moisture-resistant and smooth. Wall finish treatments shall not create ledges or crevices that can harbor dust and dirt. Joints for floor openings for pipes and ducts shall be tightly sealed.

Keeps floor, work surfaces, and other areas clean and neat. Slipresistant flooring products shall be considered for flooring surfaces whenever required for safety consideration

Use curtains which are washable/cleanable, fireproof and maintained clean at all times

Provide a sufficient number of toilets for patients, their families, and staff.  Dedicated toilets should be provided for disabled individuals as per the standards and guidelines.

Commissioning is conducted at the completion of the construction phases, and is a pre-requisite to practical completion and building occupancy. Commissioning must also include the training of the staff and ongoing monitoring of system performance during a defined period. At the end of the commissioning phase a pre-prepared check list should be completed.

Malpractice insurance for all licensed healthcare professionals according to article 25 and 26 of the UAE Federal Law number 10/2008 concerning Medical Liability should be maintained.

.

It is the responsibility of the healthcare institutes to insure their compliance with all documents submitted to and approved by the Ministry Of  Health.

Although this document was compiled according to the latest international regulations, completeness and accuracy cannot be guaranteed. Upgraded version of this document will be introduced as needed and could be found on the MOHAP website www.moh.gov.ae

.

[PAGE 9]
A covered Entry is required for dropping off patients and collection of patient. It can be used for ambulance transport when required.

In stand-alone one day surgery facilities, a separation between the external building entry and the reception area is required.

[PAGE 9]
A reception/information counter shall be located to provide visual control of the entrance to the outpatient unit and shall be immediately apparent from that entrance.

.2 The Reception counter and waiting area should provide :

Access to patients records.

Male and Female waiting area for patients and escorts and shall be under staff control. Privacy shall be ensured for patients and escorts.

Drinking water at the patients waiting area.

A separate controlled area for pediatric patients if pediatrics service provided in the facility.

Space for wheelchairs within the waiting area.

Toilet(s) for public use conveniently accessible from the waiting area without passing through patient care or staff work areas. A handwashing station shall be provided in the toilet room.

[PAGE 9-10]
At least one examination room should be available for each  doctor.

Room space requirements shall depend on the services provided.

Consultation and examination room (in the same vicinity) shall have a minimum floor area of 12.0 square meters.

Consultation room only (without examination) shall have a minimum floor area of 9.0 square meters.

.

Regular treatment room for injection or nebulizer shall have a minimum floor area of 7.5 square meters.

Room for minor treatments, procedures and casting shall have a minimum floor area of 15.0 square meters.

Support Areas for; Examination and Treatment Rooms, Nurse Station, a work counter and a space for supplies should be provided.

[PAGE 10]
A counter or shelf space for writing and documentation.

A hand-washing station. Sinks shall be designed with deep basins, made of porcelain, stainless steel, or solid surface materials. Hand sanitizer dispenser shall be provided in addition to hand-washing  stations.

A lockable refrigerator for medication use should be provided.

Locked storage for controlled drugs should be provided.

Airborne Infection Isolation Rooms should be provided in facilities with a functional program that includes treatment of patients with known infectious disease. The need for a number of such rooms should be determined by an infection control risk assessment.

Room for minor treatments, procedures and casting shall have a minimum floor area of 15.0 square meters. The minimum room dimension shall be 3 meters. Room arrangement shall permit a minimum clearance of 90 centimeters at each side and at the foot of the bed.

The treatment rooms shall be equipped with;

Hand-washing station.

Documentation space or counter for writing

A lockable refrigerator for medication use.

Locked storage for controlled drugs (if used).

.

[PAGE 11]
The number, size and location of the operating rooms  should depend  on the level of care and the functional  program.

The area should be divided into;

The unrestricted area, is the area for entrance of patients, staff and materials.

The semi-restricted area, has storage areas for clean and sterile supplies, work areas for storage and processing of instruments, and corridors leading to the restricted  areas.

The restricted area, includes the operating and procedure  rooms.

There should be sufficient space to accommodate all necessary equipment and a suitable clean storage area for surgical instruments and supplies with controlled ventilation, humidity, and  temperature.

A separate male/female rooms should be provided for patients to change their clothes, to wear their gowns and to get ready for surgery.

Rooms should be provided for staff in the facilities containing more than two operating rooms.

Back-up emergency power supply sufficient to ensure patient safety in the event of an emergency must be available.

[PAGE 11-12]
The space requirements for procedure room in level II anesthesia shall be at least 36 square meters. Extra space might be required based on the type of procedure and sedative agents used.

The OT entrance door must be wide (about 2.15 meters width) and consisting of two parts, which can be opened in either sides.

The floors, ceilings, and walls must be created by a monolithic, impervious to moisture with continuous connection.

The floors and walls should be anti-static, heat resistant, anti-

.

bacterial, anti-fungal and resistant to disinfectants.

Adequate ventilation and air exchange shall be maintained in the operation room with proper contamination control filters.

Operating room temperature shall be maintained between 20-24 °C with  room  humidity  between  30-60%  and  the  temperature  and  relative humidity set points should be adjustable.

Anesthesia scavenging systems should be installed in all spaces used for administering inhalation anesthesia.

Medical gases station, outlets for oxygen and vacuum (suction) shall be available in the procedure room.

Dedicated hand-washing station with hands-free controls shall be available in each room. Ceiling surfaces or tiles at this area shall be smooth, washable and free of particular matter that can be contaminated.

Each room should contain a Crash cart for emergency.

There should be at least one medical image viewer in each room.

A refrigerator with a locked storage for controlled drugs should be provided.

[PAGE 12-15]
Operating room shall have a minimum clear floor area of 42 square meters.

The OT entrance door must be wide (about 2.15 meters width) and consisting of two parts, which can be opened in either sides.

There should be sufficient space to accommodate all necessary equipment and personnel to allow for free and swift access to patient and all monitoring equipment.

Independent dirty exit is recommended in OT.

The floors, ceilings, and walls must be created by a continuous connection.

Surfaces should be constructed of materials that are monolithic and impervious to moisture.

.

The floors and walls should be anti-static, heat resistant, anti-bacterial, anti- fungal and resistant to disinfectants. 2.5.8.8 Adequate  ventilation  and  air  exchange  (with  at  least  25  air changes per hour as per (ASHRAE) requirement shall be maintained in the operation room which should be at positive pressure relative to the adjacent areas. 2.5.8.9 Minimum of two air supply inlets with proper contamination control filters (High Efficiency Particulate Air (HEPA) filters) delivered at or near the ceiling in addition to a minimum of two exhaust outlets located near floor  level. 2.5.8.10 Operating room temperature shall be maintained between 2024 °C with room humidity between 30-60% and the temperature and relative humidity set points should be adjustable. 2.5.8.11 Differential pressure indicating device, humidity indicator, and thermometers should be installed and should be located for easy observation. 2.5.8.12 Anesthesia scavenging systems should be installed in all spaces used for administering inhalation anesthesia. 2.5.8.13 The scrub facility shall be located adjacent to the operation  room(s). 2.5.8.13.1 Two scrub positions should be provided. 2.5.8.13.2 Ceiling surfaces or tiles at this area shall be smooth, washable and free of particular matter that can be contaminated. 2.5.8.14 Sterilizing area can be located near operating room(s) with adequate machine and equipment for cleansing, sterilization and packing of surgical instruments and trolleys. negative pressure with respect to any adjoining areas and

Sterilizing area air pressure should be kept should have minimum 10 air changes per hour.

Relative humidity should be maintained at 30% to 60%.

.

High efficiency filters should be installed in the air handling system, with adequate facilities provided for maintenance, without introducing contamination to the delivery system or the area served. 2.8.5.15 Clean and dirty utility rooms should be available for proper segregation, processing and storage of instruments. 2.8.5.16 Sterilizing area (if provided within the facility) can be located near operating theatre area with adequate high-speed autoclave machine. Operation instruments and trolleys can be arranged at this area. 2.8.5.17 Air pressure in sterilizing area should be kept negative pressure with respect to any adjoining areas and should have minimum 10 air changes per hour. Relative humidity should be maintained at 30% to 60%. 2.8.5.18 Dedicated medical store area shall be located in operation facility. Store's air pressure should be kept positive pressure with respect to any adjoining areas and   should have minimum 4 air changes per hour. Relative humidity should be maintained at 30% to 60%. High efficiency filters should be installed in the air handling system, with adequate facilities provided served. 2.8.5.19 Sufficient supply of different medical gases should be available and adequate for procedure(s) preformed (centralized medical gas system in accordance to HTM 2022 or its equivalent internationally accepted standard is  preferable). 2.8.5.20 At least on X-Ray Viewer should be provided in each room. 2.8.5.21 Emergency cart shall be available with defibrillator, necessary drugs and other CPR equipment 2.8.5.22 Emergency call system should be available. 2.8.5.23 Staff changing area (separate male and female area) shall contain special entrance for the staff and suitable place for change of

.

clothes with a minimum of one toilet for the staff in this area. Toilets air pressure should be kept negative pressure with respect to any adjoining areas and should have minimum 10 air changes per  hour.

[PAGE 15]
Recovery area shall be equipped to meet the patient need (minimum of one bed for each operation room).

Clear floor area of 9.0 square meters for each bed.

Nurse control and charting area that provides view of patient positions shall be provided.

Continues monitoring equipment and adequate patient support (ventilator usage if indicated) for hours after surgery should be  available.

Emergency cart shall be available with defibrillator, necessary drugs and other CPR equipment

Reliable source of oxygen, suction, resuscitation, and emergency drugs must be available.

Recovery area air pressure should be kept at balanced pressure with respect to any adjoining areas and should have minimum 6 air changes per hour. Relative humidity should be maintained at 45% to 55%. High efficiency filters should be installed in the air handling system.

Convenient access to hand-washing stations shall be provided.

Curtains should be provided for privacy during post-operative care.

Patient toilet accessible from patient recovery area or directly from procedure room(s) or both should be provided.

[PAGE 15-17]
The maximum number of beds per room should be one unless the functional program demonstrates the necessity

.

of a two-bed  arrangement.

When reconstruction work is undertaken and the present capacity is more than one patient, maximum room capacity should be not more than the present capacity, with a maximum of four patients.

Adequate ventilation and air exchange, with at least 6 air changes per hour as per ASHRAE requirement shall be maintained in inpatient care  area. Inpatient care area should be kept at positive pressure relative to the adjacent areas. The area temperature should be maintained at 24 °C or less and relative humidity 30 % to 60%.

High efficiency filters should be installed in the air handling  system.

Patient Room:

The following requirements shall be provided:

Walls shall be painted with lead free color with no sharp  edges.

One window at least in patient room.

Door opening to inpatient bedrooms shall be wide enough for easy movement of bed or stretcher, a minimum clear width of 1.10 meters with a frame that is 2.15 meters high is required.

Patient rooms should be constructed to meet the needs of the functional program and have a minimum of 9.50 square meters of clear floor area per bed in multiple-bed rooms and 15.0 square meters of clear floor area in single-bed rooms, exclusive of toilet rooms, closets, or lockers.

In multiple-bed rooms, a clearance of 1.40 meters should be  available  at  the  foot  of  each  bed  to  permit  the  passage  of equipment and beds.

Each patient should have within his or her room a separate  locker.

One toilet room should serve not more than two patient rooms and not more than four beds. Toilet room

.

doors should swing outward or be double acting. 2.7.5.8 A hand-washing station for the exclusive use of the staff shall be provided to serve each patient room and shall be placed outside the patient toilet room. 2.7.6.10 Calling system shall be next to each bed and

adequate electrical sockets for each bed.

Nurse Station

This area should have space for counters and storage and should have convenient access to hand-washing stations.

Documentation Area 2.7.8.1 Charting facilities should have linear surface space adequate to ensure that staff and physicians can chart and have simultaneous access to information and communication systems.

Multipurpose Room 2.7.8.2 Multipurpose rooms are provided for staff, patients, and patients' families for patient conferences, reports, education, training sessions, and consultation. These rooms may be on other floors if convenient for regular use.

Medication Station

Medicine preparation room.

Should be under visual control of the nursing  staff. Should contain a work counter, a hand- washing station, a lockable refrigerator, and locked storage for controlled drugs.

Self-contained medicine dispensing unit

This should be at the nurse station, in the clean workroom, provided the unit has adequate security for controlled drugs and adequate lighting to easily identify drugs.

.

[PAGE 18]
2.7.12.1 If the room is used for preparing patient care items, it shall contain a work counter, a hand-washing station, and storage facilities for clean and sterile supplies.

If the room is used only for storage and distribution of clean and sterile materials, exclusion of the work counter and hand-washing station can be acceptable.

Housekeeping Room 2.7.13.1 Housekeeping rooms should be directly accessible from the unit or floor they serve and may serve more than one ward on a floor.

Areas related to Staff

Staff Lounge Facilities, conveniently located private room for staff to use during their break.

Staff toilet rooms.

Staff storage facilities.

There should be closets or cabinet compartments for the nursing personnel usage.

[PAGE 18-19]
All day surgery centers must provide clinical laboratory services which could be available on the premises or through written agreement with third party to meet the patient's needs.

Basic hematology and biochemistry tests shall be provided on the premises. This  area should have a minimum clear floor area of 15.0 square meters. Extra spaces may be required for advanced test.

The center shall ensure safe and appropriate practice system for sample collection, storage and transportation of blood and other samples.

.

Phlebotomy rooms with seating space, a work counter, a hand-washing/hand hygiene provision and a reclining chair should be provided.

Blood  collection  area  shall  have  a  minimum  floor  area  of 7.50  square  meters.  When  the  clinical  laboratory  tests  are performed  on  site,  a  separate  and  dedicated  room  for  this purpose shall be provided.

Work counters and equipment space shall be provided to accommodate all on-site tests identified in the functional program of the facility.

Work counters shall be sufficient to meet equipment specifications and laboratory technician needs and have the following:

Hand-washing stations and counter sink(s).

Communications service

Appropriate facilities for storage and refrigeration of blood, urine, and other specimens

Storage cabinet(s) or closet(s) should be provided for staff  use.

[PAGE 19-21]
Radiology services at day surgery center may include; Conventional Radiography  (general  radiology), Computer Tomography (CT), Magnetic Resonance Images (MRI), Ultrasound imaging. Mammography.

Radiology Departments must comply with the National Radiation Protection Center and the related Federal and Local Authorities Laws. Radiation protection requirements shall be incorporated into the specifications and the building plans. The health facility may need a certified physicist or a qualified expert to specify the type, location, and amount of radiation protection to be installed in accordance with the  final

.

approved layout and equipment selections. Every health facility providing ionizing radiation services shall comply with the Federal and Local Authorities rules and regulations.

Adequate ventilation and air exchange, with at least 6 air changes per hour as per ASHRAE requirements shall be maintained in all Diagnostic Imaging service area. The area should be kept at positive pressure relative to the adjacent areas.

The area temperature should be maintained at 21 °C to 24 °C and relative humidity 30% to 60% and should be adjustable. High-efficiency filters should be installed in the air handling system.

Each X-ray room shall include a Warning light over the entrance door with wording 'X-RAY IN USE, DO NOT ENTER'.

Male and Female waiting area for patients and escorts shall be separated and under staff visual control.

Radiology Services; 2.9.7.1 Conventional radiography room size shall be at least 15 square meters depending on the type of machine in use and the functional program. 2.9.7.2 Tomography and radiography/fluoroscopy (R&F) rooms should be a minimum of 25 square meters depending on the type of machine in use and the functional program. 2.9.7.3 Room entrance shall not be less than 2 meters height with shielded door. patient changing shall be provided within the conventional

At least one designated patient gowning area for radiography room.

Shielded viewing window (lead glass) from the

.

Control Area to the conventional radiography room should be provided. 2.9.7.6 Minimum X-ray room surfaces and shielding thicknesses shall comply with the requirements of the National Radiation Protection Center Federal and the Local Authorities Laws. 2.9.7.7 If film systems are used, a darkroom shall be provided for processing films (at least 2 meters square) with water basin, table, benches, film holder and Safe light. 2.9.7.8 Film storage (active). A room with cabinet or shelves for filing patient film for immediate retrieval shall be provided. administrative  control and properly secured to protect films

2.9.7.9 Film storage (inactive). A room or area for inactive film storage shall be provided.  It shall be permitted  to  be outside  the  imaging  suite,  but  must  be under  imaging's against loss or damage.

Storage facilities for unexposed film shall include protection of film against exposure or damage and shall not be warmer than the air of adjacent occupied spaces.

The Ministry of Health strongly advises all new facilities not to consider using films in their practice due to the environmental hazardous caused.

[PAGE 21-25]
Shall be at least 24 square meters depending on the type of machine in use and the functional program. 2.9.8.2 Patient gowning area for patient changing shall be provided. 2.9.8.3 At least one space should be large enough for staff-assisted

dressing.

.

A control room shall be provided that is designed to accommodate the computer and other controls for the equipment. 2.9.8.5 A view window (Led glass) shall be provided to permit full view of the patient. 2.9.8.6 The angle between the control and equipment shall permit the control operator to see the patient's head all the time. 2.9.8.7 A patient toilet shall be provided. 2.9.8.8 If contrast media are used, this area shall include provision for appropriate emergency equipment and medications must be immediately available and central oxygen or oxygen cylinder to treat adverse reactions associated with administered medication. Also the area shall include; crash cart, sink, counter, and storage area. 2.9.8.9 One preparation room, if conveniently located, shall

be permitted to serve any number of rooms.

Mammography room;

The space requirement is at least 9.0 square meters depending on the machine type in use.

Patient gowning area shall be inside the room.

Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI);

The MRI room shall be permitted to range from 30.20 square meters to 57.60 square meters, depending on the machine type and the functional program.

Patient gowning area shall be provided.

2.9.10.3There should be a control room with full view of the MRI  room.

At least one space should be large enough for staff-

.

assisted dressing shall be provided.

A patient holding area according to work load shall be provided.

Hand-washing stations convenient to the MRI room, but need not be within the room should be provided.

A computer room is required.

Cryogen storage is required.

Equipment installation requirements;

Power conditioning.

Magnetic shielding.

For super-conducting MRI, cryogen venting and emergency exhaust in accordance with the original equipment manufacturer's specifications.

Adequate space for Coils storage based on the on these anatomic applications.

Magnetic door interlock should be provided.

MRI Warning light and signs should be provided.

Compatible MRI medical equipment including Anesthesia machine should be provided.

Magnetic shielding may be required to restrict  the magnetic  field  plot.

Radio frequency shielding maybe required to attenuate stray radio frequencies.

The area around, above and below the MRI suite shall be reviewed and evaluated for the following; 2.9.10.14.1 Possible occupancy by person(s) who could have pacemakers or other metal implants.

Equipment that can be disrupted by a magnetic field. Examples include but are not limited to

.

personal computers, monitors, CT scanners, and nuclear cameras.

Ultrasound imaging;

Room size shall not be less than 7.5 square meters depending on the machine type and the functional program.

Patient toilet shall be accessible within the ultrasound room.

Interventional Imaging Facilities;

The IR and /or cardiac catheterization laboratory is normally located in a separate suite, but location in the diagnostic imaging area can be permitted provided the appropriate sterile environment is provided.

The number of procedure rooms shall be based on expected utilization.

The procedure room shall be a minimum of 42.0 square meters exclusive of fixed cabinets and shelves.

Electrophysiology labs. If electrophysiology labs are also provided in accordance with the approved functional program, these labs may be located within and integral to the catheterization suite or located in a separate functional area proximate to the cardiac care unit.

Support areas for the IR suite/ cardiac catheterization lab should have;

Scrub facilities with hands-free operable controls shall be provided adjacent to the entrance of procedure rooms, and shall be arranged to minimize incidental splatter on nearby personnel, medical equipment, or supplies.

Patient prep, holding, and recovery area or

.

room.

[PAGE 25]
A patient preparation, holding, and recovery area or room shall be provided and after the procedure.

arranged to provide visual observation before and 2.9.12.5.4 A control room or area shall be provided and shall be large enough to contain and provide for the efficient functioning of the x-ray and image recording equipment. 2.9.12.5.5 A view window permitting full view of the

patient from the control console shall be provided.

Electrical equipment room. An equipment room or enclosure large enough to contain x-ray transformers, power modules, and associated electronics and electrical gear shall be provided.

Viewing room. A viewing room shall be available for use by the cardiac catheterization suite.

A clean workroom or clean supply room shall be provided.

A soiled workroom shall be provided.

Film file room shall be available for use by the cardiac catheterization suite.

Housekeeping closet shall be provided.

2.9.12.12Support areas for staff clothing and change area(s) shall be provided and arranged to ensure a traffic pattern so that personnel can enter from outside the suite, change their clothing, and move directly into the cardiac catheterization suite.

.

[PAGE 26-27]
The central sterile services department also called sterile processing department (SPD), sterile processing, central supply department (CSD) or central supply. It is integrated area in hospitals and other health care facilities. The operations usually consist of cleaning of previously used devices such as stainless steel tools, with a sterilizing liquid. After drying the device it gets wrapped in a specialized paper bag called aseptor bag, tape-sealed and then sterilized by gas or in steam autoclave.

Air volume will change at least (10) time per hour.

A computer system will be implemented to control.

Facility can implement Infection Control Policy using CSSD module in the facility management software, which improves patient safety and checking the controls from time to time.

Responsibility: In charge nurse.

All staff of the central sterile services department is required to follow a strict dress code. No staff is allowed to enter the department with normal clothes.

It contain of the following:

Cleaning and decontamination area for surgical instruments (Negative pressure)

Clean area for inspecting instruments and package chemic with the best quality control system in the world (Positive pressure).

A Sterile store to store the items (Extra positive pressure).

There are common types of equipment used to ensure sterile medical equipment:

.

Decontaminators: Is usually come in the form of a washer/decontaminator combo and is used to clean items that are heat-tolerant.

Ultrasonic washer

Tunnel washer

Cart washer

[PAGE 27-28]
Pharmacy services shall be provided in one day surgery center to meet the needs of patient directly or through written agreement with an external pharmacy provider licensed by MOHAP. The experienced Pharmacist shall:

Assure proper storage, control, handling, compounding and dispensing of drugs, devices and biological materials shall be according to the applicable Ministry of Health and Prevention (MOHAP) Laws and regulations.

Ensure provisions are made for storage and preparation of medications administered to patients.

Ensure drugs, devices and biologicals must be stored in locked areas according to the manufacturer's instructions for temperature, light, humidity or other storage instructions.

A specific refrigerator for pharmaceuticals storage and control shall be available.

Emergency drugs, devices and biologicals as determined by the healthcare professional staff must be available for use at designated locations when an emergency occurs.

.

The supply of drugs, devices and biologicals and controlled substances must be protected and restricted for use for legally authorized purposes only.

The supply of drugs and devices must be checked on a regular basis to ensure expired, mislabelled, unlabelled or unusable products are not available for patient use and are disposed accordingly.

[PAGE 28]
The area should include adequate space to accommodate carts for appropriate waste isolation such as recyclables, infectious waste, sharps and  others.

Corridors and materials handling systems should be designed to achieve an efficient movement of waste from points of generation to storage or treatment while minimizing the risk to personnel.

A separate room should be provided for receiving and holding soiled linen until ready for pickup or processing.

Clean linen storage room should be available away from dirty area.

Cart storage area should be provided for clean and soiledlinen carts separately.

A service entrance should be provided for loading and unloading of linen.

A control station shall be provided for pickup and receiving of  linen.

[PAGE 28-30]
Food service should be provided for patients, staff,

.

and visitors in according to functional program.

Strict hygienic conditions should be maintained in the facility kitchen during preparing, storing and serving food.

Patient food preparation areas should be located near the delivery and storage facilities.

Work spaces for food preparation, cooking, and baking should be as close as possible to the users.

A cart distribution should be provided with spaces for storage, loading, distribution, receiving and sanitizing of the food service with temperature control.

The cart traffic should eliminate any danger of cross circulation between outgoing food carts and incoming carts. Cart circulation should not be through food processing areas.

The waste eliminated process should avoid the contamination of the clean products and the waste products.

Measures should be taken to protect the food delivery for the patient and to ensure freshness, retain hot and cold, and avoid contamination. If delivery is from outside sources, protection against weather should be provided.

If selling devices are used for unscheduled meals, a separate room should be provided that can be accessed without having to enter the main dining area. In this room there should be a hand-washing station, and a sitting  area.

Coolers, refrigerators, and freezers should be

.

thermostatically controlled to maintain desired temperature settings.

All cooking equipment should be equipped with automatic shut-off devices to prevent excessive heat buildup.

Smoke should vent outside and the smell shouldn't escape inside the facility.

Such  services  could  be  outsourced  on  the  facility premises  or  by  an  external  provider  with  written agreement. The provided services shall be in accordance  with  the  MOHAP  standards  on  allied health services.

[PAGE 30-31]
Engineering services and  maintenance require sufficient space and  access to HVAC Plant, Central Plant, workshop and equipment areas. The services should be able to fulfill the requirement of the center according to the functional program.

The center shall make provisions to support administrative activities, filing and clerical work as appropriate.

Multiuse rooms for conferences, meetings, and health education are recommended.

2.16.1 A policy for mortuary management covering this rare

.

and tragic event shall be available  in  the  facility  with the assurance of respect and dignity of the deceased.

In case of patient death, the center shall be responsible for overseeing the transportation of deceased patients from the center to44  mortuary.

All dead bodies shall be considered infectious. Strict infection control measures shall be considered during cleaning the body. Body should be cleaned and wrapped/placed on mortuary bag.

Deceased registration shall be maintained by the one day surgery.

.
