DOC_CODE: DOH/STR/CPL/3/2023
TITLE: DOH Policy on THIQA Coverage for Assisted Reproductive Treatment and Services
AUTHORITY: Department of Health - Abu Dhabi
TIER: official
VERSION: 3

=== DOCUMENT TEXT ===

[PAGE 3]
This policy sets out the eligibility criteria for coverage of Assisted Reproductive Services by THIQA, the benefits that THIQA's holders are entitled to and the reimbursement packages that apply to THIQA's ART's network.

This document is not a guideline on a clinical management system. In no way does it replace the clinical judgement of the physician.

The purpose of this policy is to ensure that:

THIQA eligible patients in medical need of Assisted Reproductive Techniques, and who fulfill the legal requirements for initiating ART treatments, are covered for these treatments in accordance with evidence-based medical criteria Per Patient Per Year (PPPY);

Fertilization Centers will be reimbursed as per the package of services provided.

[PAGE 5]
THIQA patients will be covered for Assisted Reproductive treatments where it is determined that such treatments are medically necessary and fulfill the here stated medical criteria.

[PAGE 5]
The married couple  have been trying for pregnancy for at least  1 year or one or both  individuals have  been diagnosed with infertility problems in line with definition of infertility in this Policy;

Infertility may be diagnosed prior to one year if there are features or findings indicative of subfertility. These include:

Oligo or amenorrhea;

Inability to have intercourse;

Previous adjuvant therapy for cancer in either partner;

History indicating an increased risk of Fallopian tube occlusion (i.e. previous pelvic infection or previous pelvic surgery);

Pelvic inflammatory disease;

Abnormality in one or more semen parameters as an indication of male factor infertility (volume  1.5 ml; pH  7.2; sperm concentration  15 million spermatozoa/ml; total sperm number:  39 million spermatozoa per  ejaculate;  total  motility  40%  motile,  or  32%  with  progressive  motility;  vitality:  58%  live spermatozoa; percentage of sperm with normal morphology  4%) 4 ;

Reduced ovarian reserve;

Men with diagnosed reproductive problems;

Cases where ART candidates are known to have chronic viral infection (e.g. HIV, Hepatitis B or Hepatitis C);

4.2.10.

Known genetic/chromosomal disorders;

Pre-Cancer  treatment  Fertility  Preservation:  offered  to  married  or  single  individuals  prior  to  any  oncology treatment due to its potential adverse effects on fertility.

Other  medically  necessary  treatment  Fertility  Preservation:    offered  to  married  or  single  individuals  prior  to undergoing any medicinal regimen which could have potential adverse effects on fertility. (Refer to section 7.2.4 for the conditions.)

[PAGE 5-6]
The preferred age range for women seeking fertility is between 18-47* years (completed years i.e. 18 years 0 days till less than 48 years 0 days). *For women aged 46 to 47 years (completed years i.e. from 46 years 0 days till less than 48 years 0 days), ART treatment could be considered if the AFC (antral follicle count only if done by a fertility expert) is equal to or above 5 (as per ESHRE Bologna criteria)

There  is  an  exception  to  the  lower  age  limit  for  fertility  preservation  (cryopreservation)  in  female  patients diagnosed with cancer.

The patient could be less than 18 years of age.

Patient must have reached reproductive age (post-pubertal sexual maturity)

A person whose age is less than 18 years opting for ART treatment must have a substitute consent giver to sign on the application or request for the treatment.

Oncologist-approved fertility preservation documentation.

The following referral pathway must be established.

MDT (Multidisciplinary team) composition:

Reproductive endocrinologist and infertility expert

Oncologist

Psychologist

4 WHO - World Health Organization

BMI eligibility range for women seeking THIQA coverage for fertility treatment is from 19-40.  However, women with BMI between 35-40 who are seeking fertility treatments should be:

Informed of the increased risk of failure in fertility treatment and risk to pregnancy and child as a direct result of their physical condition; and

Advised  to  consult  a  registered  dietitian  for  weight  management  intervention  for  minimum  of  three months.

[PAGE 6]
The most effective and least risk associated procedure should always be offered as a first line treatment option;

ART candidates known to have chronic viral infection (e.g. HIV, Hepatitis B or Hepatitis C) must be referred to DOH licensed facilities that have appropriate expertise in infectious diseases and facilities to provide investigation and specialized treatment.

[PAGE 6]
Freezing of healthy oocytes and embryos as clinically required is covered for the first year as part of the Bundled Package.

Coverage for cryopreservation for subsequent years will be on a year-by-year basis.

Pooling of oocytes and /or embryos before embryo transfer may be covered in cases of:

Advanced Maternal Age (above 35 years);

Patients with a previous POR (≤3 oocytes with a conventional stimulation protocol), or patients with an abnormal ovarian reserve test [i.e. antral follicle count (AFC) less than 5 - 7 follicles or anti-Müllerian  hormone  (AMH)  less  than1.1 ng/ml]  or  patients  with  two  cycles  with  poor ovarian response after maximum stimulation in the absence of the POR and abnormal ovarian reserve criteria.

Couple fertility preservation;

Oncology patients;

Genetic testing is required;

Genetic conditions such as fragile X premutation and mosaicism for monosomy X;

Autoimmune diseases;

Endometriosis;

Women who have been identified as carrying a BRCA1 or BRCA2 genetic mutation and  have  an increased risk of developing ovarian cancer or as a risk-reduction measure for women at very high risk of breast cancer before definitive treatment

Young women with borderline ovarian tumors where fertility preservation is advisable.

Cost of excess storage time beyond 5 years or beyond the age of 47 completed years will be collected directly from patients.

All  frozen  embryos  should  be  utilized  before  the  start  of  a  new  fresh  cycle  except  for  patients  who requires embryo pooling.

Clinical  evidence  such  as  radiological,  laboratory  results,  and  genetic  reports  should  be  provided  for embryo pooling.

All  frozen  embryos  should  be  utilized  before  the  start  of  a  new  fresh  cycle  except  for  patients  who requires embryo pooling.

Clinical  evidence  such  as  radiological,  laboratory  results,  and  genetic  reports  should  be  provided  for embryo pooling.

[PAGE 6-7]
For patients undergoing an embryo transfer procedure, the number of embryos to be transferred should not exceed two embryos. (Appendix 2)

Usage of gonadotropins injections by DOH licensed Reproductive Endocrinologists/ IVF Specialists and Consultants;

All medications required for fertility treatment require pre-authorization.

DOH laboratories licensed for IVF services should have in place written procedures approved by the nominated Director to manage the ICSI/IVF cases.

Genetic investigations (i.e. Karyotyping) for certain clinical indications including the following:

Recurrent miscarriages;

Recurrent IVF implantation failure; and

Severe male factor of infertility.

[PAGE 7]
Maternal age of >35 years old;

Advanced paternal age (>50 years old);

Severe male factor of infertility, where ICSI cycle is required (azoospermia -obstructive and  non-obstructive,  severe  oligoastenoteratozoospermia,  Klinefelter  syndrome  (KS), and Y-chromosome microdeletion, and men whose semen analysis does not fulfill the current World Health Organization (WHO) criteria on repeat sample analysis;

Recurrent miscarriages- two or more pregnancy losses before 24 weeks of gestation;

Recurrent IVF implantation failure- three or more failed embryo transfers involving at least four high quality embryos;

Family history of chromosome problems such as Down's syndrome; and

Reduced ovarian reserve as defined on this policy

[PAGE 7-9]
Patients diagnosed with an autosomal dominant or X-linked genetic disorder;

Couples who were both diagnosed as carriers of the same autosomal recessive disorder;

Patients diagnosed with mitochondrial disorders caused by mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA);

Consanguine marriage with history of single gene disorders; and

History of children with single gene disorder.

.

Maximum of six stimulations/natural cycles of egg retrieval Per Patient Per Year (PPPY) AND

Maximum of three embryo transfer cycles; i.e. embryo transfer episodes originating from one or more ART cycles Per Patient Per Year (PPPY).

6.9.1. Each bundle to be completed within 1 to 4 months.

Payer TPAs must comply with the THIQA's pre -authorization requirements, where appropriate, for payment for Assisted Reproductive treatments in accordance with this Policy and consistent with the Standard Provider Contract.

Is  a  bundle  that  covers  a  fresh  cycle  starting  with  one  or  more  episodes  of  ovarian stimulation  resulting  in  a  fresh  embryo  transfer,  including  consultation,  investigation, monitoring, collection of oocytes, fertilization, and oocytes and embryos cryopreservation as required.

Maximum  six  retrievals  (stimulated  or  natural)  Per  Patient  Per  Year (PPPY);

AND  three  embryo  transfer  cycles.  i.e.    (embryo  transfer  episodes originating from one or more ART cycles) Per Patient Per Year (PPPY);

All embryos that are normal will be transferred until all euploid embryos are exhausted, or pregnancy is established;

All excess embryos to be frozen at blastocyst stage;

All excess cryopreserved embryos to be exhausted before new fresh cycle is started.

Is  a  bundle that covers embryo cryopreservation, starting with one or more episodes of ovarian stimulation resulting in embryo(s) freezing, including consultation, investigation, monitoring, collection of oocytes, and fertilization.

Genetic testing is required;

The patient is at risk for OHSS;

High progesterone level during the follicular phase P4> 1.5ng/ml;

Endometrial fluid or polyp found;

Elective freezing.

Patient who require embryo pooling as indicated in section 6.2.2;

[PAGE 9]
Maximum six retrievals (stimulated or natural) PPPY;

Resulting embryos could be used for PGTA (Preimplantation Genetic Testing for Aneuploidy), PGTM and/or PGT-SR;

All normal embryos following genetic testing will be transferred until exhausted, or  pregnancy  is  established  before  another  bundle  cycle  can  be started;

For categories 7.2.2.1.2., 7.2.2.1.3, 7.2.2.1.4, 7.2.2.1.5. all frozen embryos will be transferred until exhausted, or pregnancy is established before another Bundle 1 or Bundle 2 cycle can be started;

Oncology patients: Due to the urgency for treatment usually only one cycle can be  done.  Exception  would  be  in  cases  of  borderline  tumors  where  more stimulations can take place before definitive treatment.

[PAGE 9-10]
Is  a  bundle  of  a  frozen  cycle  including  consultation  and  monitoring  then  thawing  one embryo or more resulting in embryo transfer.

Prerequisite of Bundle 1 or Bundle 2 and availability of existing frozen embryos.

Limit:

Three embryo transfer cycles. i.e.  (embryo transfer episodes originating from one or more ART cycles) PPPY;

All embryos that are normal will be transferred until all euploid embryos are exhausted, or pregnancy is established prior to the start of another cycle;

[PAGE 10]
Is a bundle that covers eggs cryopreservation to married or single individuals, starting with one  or  more  episodes  of  ovarian  stimulation  resulting  in  eggs  freezing, including consultation, monitoring investigation, and collection of oocytes.

To be offered Fertility preservation for:

Oncology patients

Genetic  conditions  such  as  fragile  X  premutation  and  mosaicism  for monosomy;

Autoimmune diseases;

Endometriosis;

Women who have been identified as carrying a BRCA1 or BRCA2 genetic mutation and have an increased risk of developing ovarian cancer or as a risk-reduction  measure  for  women  at  very  high  risk  of  breast  cancer before definitive treatment;

Young women with borderline ovarian tumors where oocyte preservation is advisable. Oncology patients: Due to the urgency for treatment usually only one cycle can be done. Exception would be in cases of borderline tumors  where  more  stimulations  can  take  place  before  definitive treatment.

[PAGE 10-11]
Maximum six retrievals (stimulated or natural) per policy, per patient per year (PPPY).

Is a bundle of a cycle starting with thawing eggs and resulting in embryo transfer, including consultation, monitoring, fertilization, and embryos cryopreservation as required.

Prerequisite of bundle 4 and availability of frozen eggs from previous cycles.

Limit:

Three embryo transfer cycles. i.e.  (embryo transfer episodes originating from one or more ART cycles) PPPY;

Oncology  patients:  Due  to  the urgency  for  treatment  usually  only  one cycle  can  be  done.  Exception  would  be  in  cases  of  borderline  tumors where more stimulations can take place before definitive treatment.

Genetic screening of embryos - requires pre-authorization;

All medications- requires Pharmacy Benefits Approval;

Oocyte and embryo storage on yearly basis and up to 5 years OR the maximum age of 47 completed years;

All other ART services other than IVF and ICSI to be reimbursed as per the mandatory tariff.

Successfully  completed  step(s)  of  an  incomplete  bundle  shall  be  reimbursed  as  per  the service codes specified on the DoH claims and adjudication rules.

Details on billing, coding and physician documentation can be found in the billing and adjudication rules published for ART bundled payments

This Policy applies to all THIQA categories and all DOH licensed ART providers within the Emirate of Abu Dhabi.

DOHlicensed ART's providers and THIQA's TPA must comply with the terms and requirements of THIQA's rules & regulations & the provisions of this Policy PPPY.

DOH may impose sanctions in relation to any breach of requirements under this Policy in accordance with the Disciplinary Regulations of the Healthcare Sector.

DOH has put in place clear monitoring mechanisms to assess the policy.

Note: In addition, this Policy should be read in conjunction with related Abu Dhabi and UAE laws, DOH Standards, Policies and Manuals including but not limited to:

HAAD Standard Provider Contract.

DOH Quality Policy.

DOH Regulator Manual.

DOH Healthcare Provider Manual.

DOH Health Professional Manual.

DOH Standard on Patient Healthcare Data Privacy.

DOH Policy on Health Information Exchange.

Federal Law on Medical Liability.

Federal Law on the Practice of Human Medicine.

Federal Law on Assisted Reproduction

[PAGE 14]
The treating clinician can consider these conditions and decide after complete clinical assessment including medical history, family history and investigations.

1 BMI less than <18 or >35

2 Short stature i.e. less than 150 cm

3 Small pelvis

4 Previous IVF success

5 Systemic diseases such as:

Hypertension

Diabetes

Sickle cell

Type 1 DM, Uncontrolled Type II DM, DM with end organ damage

Chronic kidney disease

Cardiopathy,

Autoimmune diseases

6 High risk of developing deep vein thrombosis (DVT) like APS or ATIII deficiency or a personal history of unprovoked DVT

7 Previous history of twins

8 History of spontaneous preterm delivery

9 History of premature rupture of membranes

10 History of abnormal placentation such as placenta accreta, increta, percreta or previa

11 History of obstetrical complications or outcomes (intrauterine growth restriction, abruptio placentae, postpartum bleeding, intrauterine fetal death etc)

12 Two or more previous C-sections

13 Uterine/Mullerian anomalies such as septum, double uterus, etc.

14 Intramural fibroids >4 cm in diameter

15 Previous myomectomy of an intramural fibroid 4cm or larger

16 Patients having history for uterine surgery with opening of endometrial cavity
